[Merged by Bors] - Allow enabling secure mode with Kerberos (#334)
stackabletech/hdfs-operator: docs/modules/hdfs/pages/usage-guide/security.adoc

= Security

== Authentication

> Currently the only authentication mechanism support is Kerberos, which is disabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the only supported authentication mechanism is Kerberos, which is disabled by default.
```

> For Kerberos to work a Kerberos server is needed, which the users needs to provide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Kerberos to work a Kerberos KDC is needed, which the users needs to provide.
```

The xref:home:secret-operator:secretclass.adoc#backend-kerberoskeytab[secret-operator documentation] states which kind of Kerberos servers are supported and how they can be configured.

> Our integration tests use a mit krb5 server which is installed on Kubernetes, but is not production ready, e.g. because no high availability is configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our integration tests use a MIT krb5 server which is installed on Kubernetes. Our test setup is, however, not production ready. For example, it does not configure any high availability.
```

Reviewer: Honestly I'd almost strike this whole line entirely.

Author: striked :heavy_check_mark:

=== 1. Prepare Kerberos server
To configure HDFS to use Kerberos you first need to collect information about your Kerberos server, e.g. hostname and port.
Additionally you need a service-user, which the secret-operator uses to create create principals for the HDFS services.

> === 2. Create SecretClass

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== 2. Create Kerberos SecretClass
```

Afterwards you need to enter all the needed information into a SecretClass, as described in  xref:home:secret-operator:secretclass.adoc#backend-kerberoskeytab[secret-operator documentation].
The following guide assumes you have named your SecretClass `kerberos-hdfs`.

=== 3. Configure HDFS to use SecretClass
The last step is to configure your HdfsCluster to use the newly created SecretClass.

[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  clusterConfig:
    kerberos:
      tlsSecretClass: tls # Optional, defaults to "tls"
      kerberosSecretClass: kerberos-hdfs # Put your SecretClass name in here
----

The `kerberosSecretClass` is used to give HDFS the possibility to request keytabs from the secret-operator.

The `tlsSecretClass` is needed to request TLS certificates, used e.g. for the Web UIs.

> As an alternative you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> === 4. Verify Kerberos is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== 4. Verify that Kerberos is used
```

> One option is to use `stackablectl services list --all-namespaces` to get the endpoint the HDFS namenodes are reachable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `stackablectl services list --all-namespaces` to get the endpoints where the HDFS namenodes are reachable.
```

Open the link (note that the namenode is now using https).
You should see a Web UI similar to the following:

image:hdfs_webui_kerberos.png[]

The important part is

> Security is on.

> An alternative is to shell into the namenode and try to access the file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can alsoshell into the namenode and try to access the file system.
```

Author: Changed to `You can also shell into the namenode and try to access the file system:`

`kubectl exec -it hdfs-namenode-default-0 -c namenode -- bash -c 'bin/hdfs dfs -ls /'`

> You should get a `org.apache.hadoop.security.AccessControlException: Client cannot authenticate via:[TOKEN, KERBEROS]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should get the error message `org.apache.hadoop.security.AccessControlException: Client cannot authenticate via:[TOKEN, KERBEROS]`.
```

=== 5. Access HDFS

> In case you want to access your HDFS it is recommended to start up a client Pod that connects to HDFS over shelling into the namenode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want to access your HDFS it is recommended to start up a client Pod that connects to HDFS, rather than shelling into the namenode.
```

In thew following example the `dr.who=;nn=;nm=;jn=;` part is needed for HDFS internal operations and the user `testuser` is granted admin permissions.

[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  nameNodes:
    configOverrides: &configOverrides
      core-site.xml:
        hadoop.user.group.static.mapping.overrides: "dr.who=;nn=;nm=;jn=;testuser=supergroup;"
  dataNodes:
    configOverrides: *configOverrides
  journalNodes:
    configOverrides: *configOverrides
----

== Wire encryption
IMPORTANT: Wire encryption can only be enabled in combination with Kerberos

The following modes are supported:

[cols="1,4"]
|===
|Wire encryption mode|Description

|Authentication
|Establishes mutual authentication between the client and the server.
 Sets `hadoop.rpc.protection` to `authentication`, `hadoop.data.transfer.protection` to `authentication` and `dfs.encrypt.data.transfer` to `false`.

|Integrity
|In addition to Authentication, it guarantees that a man-in-the-middle cannot tamper with messages exchanged between the client and the server.
Sets `hadoop.rpc.protection` to `integrity`, `hadoop.data.transfer.protection` to `integrity` and `dfs.encrypt.data.transfer` to `false`.

> |Privacy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Privacy (default)
```

|In addition to the features offered by Authentication and Integrity, it also fully encrypts the messages exchanged between the client and the server.
Sets `hadoop.rpc.protection` to `privacy`, `hadoop.data.transfer.protection` to `privacy` and `dfs.encrypt.data.transfer` to `true`.
|===

In case kerberos is enabled, the default value is `Privacy` for best security.
The security comes with a cost of a potentially degraded performance, thus wire encryption can be disabled but is recommend to be enabled for security reasons.

You can specify the wire encryption mode to use as follows:

[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  clusterConfig:
    kerberos:
      # kerberosSecretClass: kerberos
      wireEncryption: Privacy

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is strongly recommended to leave `wireEncryption` in its default `Privacy` mode, since `Authentication` and `Integrity` leave the system vulnerable to man-in-the-middle and traffic sniffing attacks, respectively.
```

Author: I would prefer to document the wire-encryption setting. WDYT of

In case kerberos is enabled, the default value is `Privacy`, since `Authentication` and `Integrity` leave the system vulnerable to man-in-the-middle and traffic sniffing attacks, respectively.
The security measures come with a cost of a potentially degraded performance, thus wire encryption can be disabled, but is recommend to be enabled for security reasons.

You can specify the wire encryption mode to use as follows:
[...]

Reviewer: I definitely don't think it's appropriate to have language that could encourage users to touch it in a guide document like this.

Author: IMHO it's a totally legit use-case to enable Kerberos but don't use wire-encryption (I would say every hdfs clusters I have used so far had this setup (if Kerberos was used at all))

Author: Sorry, you changed your comment. Do you have an idea what can we add to make it more even more clear to not disable wire encryption?

Reviewer: > IMHO it's a totally legit use-case to enable Kerberos but don't use wire-encryption (I would say every hdfs clusters I have used so far had this setup (if Kerberos was used at all))

I think this is the crux of the disagreement though. What's the scenario where you do care about authentication but not about having it be useful for anything?

Author: let me cheekily copy Lars' words:

> Kerberos itself is a secure authentication protocol already so it is independent of wire encryption and there might be use-cases where people want to have best possible performance and don't care about whether anyone can read the data on the network (e.g. other protection mechanisms)

Author: Removed the whole wire-encryption thing

> Security is on.

You can also shell into the namenode and try to access the file system:

> `kubectl exec -it hdfs-namenode-default-0 -c namenode -- bash -c 'kdestroy && bin/hdfs dfs -ls /'`

Reviewer: This paragraph doesn't really have the same oomph if we're kdestroying. Maybe we should change it to a `kubectl run` of some kind with a temporary pod instead?

Author: Agreed. Would it be ok to get rid of this command entirely and rely on the Webinterface?

Reviewer: I like demonstrating it with the CLI too, honestly. Maybe that's something to add to the stackablectl wishlist at some point...

Reviewer: Do we still need to `kdestroy` now that we're back to CC-per-container? Actually, I think we could just override the CC path for that specific command...

Author: Current PR state has no kdestroy any more :+1:
